How Our Supreme Teacher Generated Bodhicitta and Other Topics[1]

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

As regards our supreme, compassionate Teacher, the Sūtra of Repaying Kindness[2] says that at
some point in the distant reaches of beginningless time, when he was an ordinary person
possessing all the fetters, he fell, through the power of karma, into the hell realm called
Fiery Carts. There he became a strong man, who, together with a companion, was made to pull
a cart containing the hell-guardian Bull-Headed Abang.[3] When his companion was so worn
out that he was unable to pull the cart, the strongman said to Abang, "Have some compassion
for him." This so enraged Abang that he struck the strong man in the neck with an iron
trident and killed him. This purified the negativity of a hundred aeons, and he was freed
[from the hell]. A long time later, he became a potter’s son called Bhāskara[4] in the south
of Jambudvīpa and felt such intense devotion to the Buddha Mahāśākyamuni that he offered
him a cupful of soup and five cowries and made the aspiration that begins, "O sugata,
may I and others have a form…"[5] With this, he first set his mind upon supreme awakening.
The Sūtra of the Fortunate Aeon[6] says:

In a former life, when I had a lowly status,I offered some soupTo the Tathāgata ŚākyamuniAnd
first set my mind on supreme awakening.

This is how he first generated bodhicitta. Then, for the gathering of the accumulations the
basic vehicle considers that the first incalculable aeon lasts from the time he was the potter’s
son and Mahāśākyamuni came into the world until the age of the Tathāgata Rāṣṭrapāla.[7]
During this time he venerated seventy-five thousand [buddhas]. During the second incalculable
aeon, from the time he was the brahmin’s son who offered seven blue utpala flowers
to Dīpaṃkara until the time of the Sugata Indradhvaja, he venerated seventy-six thousand
[buddhas]. During the third incalculable aeon, from the time he was a king who gave offerings
to the Sugata Kṣemaṅkara and constructed a stūpa for his remains until he became a renunciant
and generated bodhicitta before Buddha Kāśyapa, he venerated and delighted seventy-seven
thousand [buddhas], it is said.

The Treasury[8] says that the first incalculable aeon lasted from the time of Śākyamuni until
that of Ratnaśikhī, the second until Dīpaṃkara, and the third until Vipaśvin. Then the Buddha
spent a hundred aeons creating the causes for the excellent physical signs. When he
was the son of a brahmin he stood on one leg before the Buddha Puṣya, who was absorbed in
meditative equipoise on the fire element, and circumambulated him for seven days. He offered
praise with the verse that begins, "Leader of beings, there are no…"[9] He thus gathered
nine aeons’ worth of accumulations. Then, after ninety-one further aeons, when the Buddha
Kāśyapa came to the world [the future buddha] was the son of a brahim who took him as his
guru. Having thus created the causes for the physical signs, he became what is known as
a bodhisattva of certain status. Having perfected the causes for creating the excellent physical
signs, he was born in Tuṣita as Śvetaketu as a bodhisattva with one further rebirth.
Then he became Siddhārtha in Jambudvīpa, a bodhisattva in his final birth. With that physical
support, at dusk he tamed Māra at the Vajra Seat, at midnight he settled in meditation,
and at dawn he actualized the vajra-like samādhi. According to the Mahāyāna tradition,
the first incalculable aeon corresponds to the first bhūmi of aspiring conduct, the second
incalculable aeon corresponds to the second to seventh bhūmis, and the third incalculable
aeon corresponds to the remaining stages up to and including the tenth bhūmi.

The Great Commentary on the Eight Thousand Verses[10] explains thirty-three incalculable aeons.


Concerning the inception of the incalculable aeons, the Compendium of the Great Vehicle[11]
says:

Possessing the strength of goodness and aspiration,Having a stable mind and progressing exceptionally,The
bodhisattva begins the processThat lasts three incalculable aeons.

When these four factors are obtained at the beginning of the path of accumulation that is said
to mark the beginning of the incalculable aeons. Then, as Prince Vīryakārin, the son of
King Vijaya, he received teachings from the Tathāgata Arciskandha and by venerating the buddha
and his entourage for six hundred and sixty million years attained the first bhūmi.
For the second incalculable aeon, at the time of King Handsome Appearance[12] in Golden City
the teacher was the merchant Prajñābhadra, who received teachings from and venerated the
Tathāgata Ratnāṅga for a thousand years. By thus gathering the accumulations he actualized
the seventh bhūmi. During the third incalculable aeon, when he was brahmin’s pupil named
Kumāramegha in the vicinity of the Lotus Palace of King Jitāri he offered five utpala flowers
to the Sugata Dīpaṃkara. He then spread out his golden hair like a mat upon the ground
and pledged, "If you do not grant me a prophecy [of future awakening], I will emaciate
myself." The Tathāgata knew this and, placing his feet upon the hair, issued a prophecy: "In
future you will become the Buddha known as Śākyamuni." At this, the future Buddha was overjoyed
and levitated to a height of seven palm trees. He actualized many hundreds of billions
of samādhis and reached the eighth bhūmi.

Thereafter he took many further births as Śakra, Sunetra, and so on, always working for the
welfare of sentient beings, until finally at the time of the Buddha Kāśyapa when the human
lifespan was twenty thousand years he became a brahmin’s son who served many buddhas and
gathered the accumulations for an incalculable aeon. He thereby actualized the tenth bhūmi.
Through the vajra-like samādhi at the end of the continuum of the tenth bhūmi he thoroughly
eliminated the obscurations together with their habitual tendencies with no possibility
of their return—the perfect elimination. And by gaining the wisdom that knows the nature
of knowable things and the things themselves in all their multiplicity—the perfect realization.
He thus gained great awakening with the nature of the three kāyas: the sambhogakāya
as the consummate benefit for oneself, the nirmāṇakāya as the consummate benefit for others,
and the dharmakāya as the support for both. The nature of these three or the realization
of the dharmadhātu of twofold purity inseparable from immaculate qualities, is then the
svabhāvikakāya. As The Ornament of Realization says:

The svabhāvikakāya of the SageHas the nature and the characterOf all the aspects of total purityWhen
immaculate qualities are won.[13]

And concerning the one whose major and minor marks are resplendent in Great Akaniṣṭha:

Since the one with thirty-two signsAnd eighty minor marksEnjoys the Mahāyāna,This is said to
be the Sage’s enjoyment body (sambhogakāya). [14]

Concerning the uninterrupted activity to benefit the infinite sentient beings to be tamed:

The kāya that brings benefitImpartially to beings in various waysFor as long as existence itself
remainsIs the Sage’s unending nirmāṇakāya.[15]

In this way, the supreme teacher, the Lord of Sages, carries out what are classed as his twelve
most important deeds within this realm. The Sublime Continuum says:

He manifests birthAnd then departs from the Tuṣita realm,Enters the womb and is born.He masters
artistic disciplines,Enjoys the company of queens,Renounces the palace, practises austerities,Arrives
at the seat of enlightenment,Conquers the forces of Māra,Perfectly awakens,
turns the Dharma Wheel,And passes beyond sorrow.These are the deeds he revealsThroughout
wholly impure realmsFor as long as existence endures.[16]

The turning of the first Wheel of Dharma took place in Vārāṇasī. The second, intermediate turning
occurred at Vulture’s Peak Mountain. The final turning of the Dharma Wheel took place
in Śrāvastī and elsewhere. That these turnings occurred simultaneously is suggested by the
Exposition of Intention, which says:

The singular and engaging vajra word,Which is non-conceptual and unerring,Takes on various aspectsAccording
to the dispositions of disciples.

The first council took place in the Nyagrodha Cave, which was seen to be sufficiently secluded.
The second council was convened when the monks of Vaiśālī were practising ten fundamental
transgressions. Aśoka acted as the patron for the arhat Yaśas in Vaiśālī’s temple of Kaśmipuri.[17]
Seven hundred arhats assembled, rejected the ten transgressions, and compiled
the teachings. The third council took place at the Kusana monastery in Kashmir under the
patronage of King Kaniṣka of Jālandhara. The elder arhat by the name of Siṃha[18] gathered
five hundred arhats including Purnika, five hundred bodhisattvas including Vasumitra, and
five hundred ordinary paṇḍitas, and together they established the eighteen schools as authoritative
and compiled the teachings.

Undivided, without beginning, middle or end,Non-dual, beyond the three, stainless and non-conceptual,The
nature of the dharmadhātu, which is empty,Is seen by the yogin in meditative
equipoise.

As there is no one in this world more learned than the Victorious One,And the highest reality
is not known fully except through omniscience,Therefore, do not tamper with the sūtras which
the Ṛṣi himself set out.To do so would spoil the Sage’s tradition and harm the sacred
Dharma.

The five disciples of the first retinue were Ājñātakauṇḍinya,[19] Aśvajit,[20] Bhadrika,[21]
Vāṣpa,[22] and Mahānāman.[23]

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Terton
Sogyal Trust, 2021.